[Music]
hi
i'm ewen but i'm also known as tiny girl
eats world over on instagram where you
can find me sharing the best eats
i've traveled the globe to try different
cuisines from the hawker centers in
singapore to the local foods that
samoans eat
there is an amazing world of food out
there but in this series i'm bringing
you the world in your kitchen
so today we have chef rex de guzman
joining us founder of turoturo london
a filipino street food stall so rex
thanks for being here today
thank you thanks for having me so what
are you going to be making for us today
and why you've chosen to make this dish
so i am making a traditional filipino
recipe it's called chicken in a sauce
it's basically a marinated and grilled
chicken
so it comes from the city of bacolod
which
is located in the western region of the
philippines
and i'm basically going to start by
marinating the
chicken so rex tell us a little bit more
about this dish so
is it very traditional to the
philippines and when would we normally
eat it
it's found in many restaurants they have
a market called monocon country
which basically means chicken country so
chicken in the style itself it means
to to grill or to roast so what you'd
find traditionally in the philippines is
there's a lot of stalls that have like
charcoal so they have their barbecues
and they're grilling
all sorts of different meats and the
ingredients that you're putting into the
dish right now are they very traditional
marinade ingredients
so the main the main marination is the
vinegar so it actually has that sour
flavor
so in a lot of filipino recipes uh
there's a lot of
uh sour ingredients we we have a fruit
in the philippines called calamansi
it's it's a very tiny fruit it's kind of
like a cross between a lime and a lemon
and unfortunately it's very hard to get
it here in the uk so in my
recipe i'm actually using limes and
lemons with the vinegar
okay so we can have a good little
substitute yeah
if you want to make this dish at home
i'm actually using the back of my knife
here
to bash the lemongrass and what this
does is this just
releases the aroma yeah no i'm starting
to smell it already yeah yeah
straight away and have you spent much
time in the philippines then
so i was born and raised here in the uk
i don't get to visit as much as i'd like
to
the last time i visited was in 2016
where i traveled the philippines for
three months
and it was basically the purpose of that
was so that i could
learn more about the regional dishes in
the philippines so basically i've got in
here at the moment
just to show you i've got vinegar so the
coconut vinegar with some red onions
garlic lemongrass and then i've got the
bay leaves the peppercorns
and brown sugar so that you just mix
together
i'm going to give that a quick taste as
well
you always get your taste right yeah
would you like to just have a taste of
that oh yeah
you'll find that it is predominantly
quite sour but you find all those
ingredients start to melt together all
right and you can in fact like make this
marinade well in advance
so the flavors infuse that's really
punchy you can really get all the citrus
from that yeah that's lovely when i say
filipinos have that sour
flavour profile we usually use a lot of
vinegar now cooking be careful not to
marinate for too long
if you marinate it too long what happens
is the vinegar will
uh sort of like turn the meat into a
mush and
so you do have to be careful with that
okay i found that four hours is quite a
it's quite good it's like just enough
good middle ground yeah good meal
yeah cool so you see i've got the
chicken just spread it out
and then so yeah got the aceh oil and
does it have a particular taste to it or
is it just mainly the color that comes
through
i would say yeah i would say it's mainly
the color it does
have a slightly very mild nutty taste
but that's why we usually put the
crushed garlic just to add a little bit
of flavor into the oil yeah
so basically what we've done is i've
just got the pan nice and hot and we
seared it on the skin side first and we
just want to kind of get those bar marks
get it start to caramelize
and you can see where the actuator oil
started to give you that kind of bright
orange tinge
so what i'm going to do now is i'm just
going to put a little bit of salt
seasoning on top
and then i'm going to get this into our
oven
so it's at 190 and i'll probably take
about 20 to 30 minutes
okay so we've popped the chicken into
the oven it's been cooking away and i
can see we've got a new plate of
vegetables out
so what are the next steps yeah so we
are going to make what's called achara
so it's basically like a filipino pickle
uh usually we use like a green papaya so
it'd be like a shredded green papaya
that's pickled in vinegar and sugar
i use like a substitute of like mooli so
i use mooli
and carrot as a kind of a substitute
really is basically like your
it's also known as daikon radish so
whilst you're doing that is there
anything i can do to help you
yes please so i'll get you to take the
garlic
and some ginger i'll put
and if i could get you to just like
finally slice it and then just
shred it as fine as you can so we do
have a lot of different influences from
china even as far as india and that's
mainly because of
like trade and one of the biggest
influences in our cuisine i would say is
uh this the spanish empire so basically
the spanish
empire colonized us for over about 300
years
and the spanish empire so when i say the
empire it's
this includes as far as mexico it also
includes
uh portugal and what they did was in
manila they used the trading ports
uh to connect basically the east with
the west so that's
right so the philippines is kind of like
a middle ground for like trade
we got an exchange of ingredients so an
example of that would be things like
guava and cacao oh amazing yeah from
mexico
that came to the philippines and then
from china we'd get things like like
noodles would come from china
so filipino food isn't you know as
famous as some other
southeast asian countries in the uk um
such as thai or vietnamese food
so what do you think is you know the
kind of barriers to filipino food
becoming a little bit more well-known
here
yeah i think the the main thing is the
is the educating of the of the cuisine
yeah i think that if we can uh start to
have businesses or we have
you know even influencers who can just
start educating
people about filipino food and where its
influence is
that's going to give like basis of
understanding yeah there's a few
restaurants now in the uk
and in london that are doing pushing
filipino food
and i think if we have a few more in
there we're going to start generating
that interest and
i think especially in london in the uk
people are always looking for a
different kind of cuisine now
new adventure so yeah it's a really good
time to kind of innovate
and try new things and what would you
say your favorite filipino dish is then
if you
had apart from i guess chicken in the
sauce
um if you wanted to really pioneer
addition the uk what would it be
there's a childhood dish that my mom
always used to make for me it's called
pancit palabo
so panzip is basically like noodles yeah
so it's a noodle dish with
loads of different toppings it's got
like a prawn sauce okay
and then it's got toppings like pork
belly
it's got smoked mackerel on it it's got
egg on it it's got
lemon it's got spring onions so it's
kind of like one of those
really great dishes to just mix all in
one so that's right now
garlic uh ginger carrots the mooli and
some chilies
yes that's correct and some shallots is
that right yeah there we go
yeah so i'm just i've just added some
salt in
and this is going to break down the
ingredients for the achara so it's just
to soften everything up and to bring
the the water out of it cool so you went
if i could get you to help me with the
pickle licker for the achara
this is a very basic pickle liquor
method that i use so it's 300 grams of
vinegar
200 grams of sugar and 100 grams of
water
so this this short grain rice i've got
here is it's already been washed i've
washed it a few times and strained it
off
and we're going to do the filipino way
or shall i say the asian meat
it's a method that i'm sure you you you
know yourself
and basically i'm going to measure the
water uh into our rice so we're going to
pour enough
in until it just oops until it just
covers
about an inch kind of the about the line
of your you know what yeah that is how
my dad taught me to cook rice just for
the first line of your finger
yep so i'm gonna measure it now
yeah i think we're good great so our
rice is nicely coming to the boil over
there and we've got some
new ingredients in front of us so what
are the next things we're doing right so
we're going to make the
uh soften basically a glaze for the
chicken in the sauce
so rex obviously you grew up here eating
filipino food that your family made
but when you went over to the
philippines how did that compare when
you had the food
actually over there one of the biggest
things that stands out for me with the
philippines is definitely the
just the vast amount of like seafood the
seafood and then the
amounts of different amounts of fruits
that you can get out there i remember
when i went when i last went it
when i visited for three months i went
to visit
my my tito's place so my tito is like my
uncle so it's my sister's
i believe my sister's oldest brother and
we went to visit his
his house which is like situated far in
the farmland
okay he would do things like just ask us
if we want coconut and he'd literally go
climb a tree that's like
literally outside of his house oh okay
just like climb a tree
and he's like he must be like in his 70s
now
so yeah he would go climb cut a coconut
off a young coconut and then we'd drink
the
water and then we'd scrape out the the
meat from the inside that's my favorite
yeah yeah it's the best bit
such a lovely memory that you have with
your uncle um and honestly i hope that
when i'm 70 i can be climbing coconut
trees like that
yeah i mean i don't i could i never have
the guts to do that myself so yeah he's
pretty brave
yeah so i'm gonna have a little peek at
the rice
and have a think what do you think nice
and fluffy yeah i think it's pretty much
ready to go
tell us a bit more about you know your
restaurant and
have you made any plans to start it up
yet yeah
so turoturo is is a
my little baby it's a it's a business
that i started
um from oh i've always wanted my own
restaurant
so during territory it was kind of like
a starting point for me
so as a chef i started off pioneering
filipino food by doing pop-up
restaurants
and then eventually i built up the
confidence to go into the street food
store
so turoturo it actually means
in tagalog which is the main language in
the philippines it means the point point
so it's like an expression yeah so it's
used
in the philippines for a general term
for
like street food stalls but now my my
vision is to now take it down the
restaurant room and so these two sources
typically serve together
for you to kind of alternate which one
you're going to dip into
yeah so it's it's kind of a preference
thing and you'll find
these two dipping sauces quite commonly
in
in filipino restaurants that serve
chicken in the south but these dipping
sauces are used
all over all over dishes in the
philippines so it's quite
a common flavor that you would find it's
kind of like the
our ketchup it's our version of the
kitchen yeah
good way to put it yeah uh we just have
a couple of tastes i don't know if you
want to
trade my one's going to be definitely
quite hot
okay shall we swap and i'll
swap does that for you for you to taste
what i've made
yeah that's great yeah i like the little
bit of heat that comes through a little
bit spicy
um but i presume you don't have to
bombard
them yeah that's why they call it sour
and it's usually usually you would have
your own
sauce on the table and you would dip the
meat or that okay
so yeah cool i think that's good this
tastes really good nice and balanced
so i think that's our sauce is ready so
our chicken's been resting it looks
lovely and shiny we've got our sauces
all made and looks like we're about
ready to plate up yes
we are indeed yes so we've got the
banana leaf here to start so we're going
to bring it all together on there
decided to put banana leaf a little
tribute to the philippines
banana leaf is used as plates in general
there so
i wanted to put that in there and
actually uh one thing that i learned
from a chef
is he did teach me about bringing out
the oils the natural oils in the banana
beef and it makes the leaf shiny so
usually what we do is we toast this over
either your charcoal barbecue or a gas
stove
this time we're going to use a little
blowtorch um so we're going to give that
a whirl
wow yeah so shiny it's made such a
change to the leaf yeah
so i've really enjoyed exploring
filipino food today and i
cannot wait to tuck into this yeah me
too let's go let's do it
right so just a little bit of everything
is that how we're eating it
yeah go for it some rice
and i should probably mention we eat
with fork and spoon because we're always
using it too this is put everything
together on one spoon
this is perfect in the way i eat all
right
that is so good
you get such a nice tang from the pickle
yeah and you get the contrasting you
know char from the actual chicken itself
i really like how spicy that is but
that's because i love spice yes
and then again if you don't like spice
that much you can just use that's spicy
chili
yes yeah this is stunning i really like
it yeah
[Music]
you